Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager for
Development Tools,
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
Good afternoon.
It's good to see so
many of you here today.
I hope the show has been
running well for you so far.
Yesterday in our
development tools overview,
we talked about the fact that we build
on standard technology and standards.
And many people new to Mac OS X have
been encountering the command-line
tool set of UNIX for the first time.
Just out of curiosity,
let's use the applause meter.
How many people here are coming to
Mac OS X from a UNIX environment?
It's about there.
How many people are investigating the
UNIX tools from a Mac OS environment?
That's about there.
That's about what I expected.
So without further ado,
let me introduce Stan Shebs,
our senior engineer in core tools.
And he's well known in
the open source community.
Hello, everybody.
Does this-- Can everybody hear me?
Okay.
So...
Wanted to start off by going
through the basic thing we're
going to be talking about today,
which is the fact that Mac OS X has
a full set of command-line tools.
We use these tools to
speed our OS X ports,
especially coming from UNIX.
And what it does is it gives us,
the command-line tools also give us a
familiar place for UNIX applications,
both for compiling them and then for
running them once we've compiled them.
So the specific topics,
I'm going to go over how to build
and debug using command-line tools,
talk something about what the tools
are available on a standard system
with the developer tools installed,
talk about some of the unique
features of the command-line tools,
go a little bit into porting issues,
although not in great depth because
there's another session for that,
and then also to talk something
about the documentation
resources that are available.
[Transcript missing]
Another thing that having the command
line available on Macs now is that
it gives us a lot of leverage.
30 years of development on
UNIX from everything from servers
to scientific applications to
educational things and so forth,
there's actually an amazing
number of tools that have
been developed and delivered,
both large and small.
And so a lot of that stuff will simply
just work on Mac OS and Mac OS X.
And this is actually the first time
that things just worked on Mac OS X.
So to get started with all that,
we have a terminal program.
And this is an application.
If you go to Applications, Utilities,
there's a terminal icon in there.
It's also located at
/applications/utilities/terminal.app,
but of course that doesn't really
do you much good because that's
the command line path and you can't
type open /applications/whatever
until you have a terminal window.
Anyway, so that's just to show you where
it is and you can actually CD down
to that and just see what the
terminal program is made up of.
So Terminal,
how many people here have not seen
Terminal or not used Terminal,
let me ask?
How many people have not used Terminal?
Okay, good.
So everybody's actually seen all
this and this is all redundant.
Anyway, in case you didn't know it,
you can open up multiple windows.
Each window runs a separate
instance of the shell,
and I'll talk about the
shell more in a moment.
It gives you lots of preferences,
and it is available on all systems.
So you can go to somebody's
strange OS X system,
whether or not it has
the Dev Tools installed,
and Terminal will be there.
So now Sean Faagan is going to give
us a demo of the Terminal program.
Not that anybody needs it,
but Sean has a few tricks up his sleeve.
and John I can hear that, okay.
I had hoped that there would
be fewer people who didn't
know the Terminal application.
I'd give a spiffy demo of it,
but you all know about it, so...
Here's where you get to it.
It's under Utilities, Terminal,
and everyone knows about Console too,
right?
and All right.
Let's make the font larger.
I'm going to be using this later
so I have to set it up anyway.
The display,
set font to something larger.
Let's go 14 point.
How's that?
Can everyone see it except
for the windows in front?
Great.
The other thing I was going to do,
there is, as Stan alluded,
there is the open command,
which is kind of like
double-clicking something.
You do that,
finder brings up the root directory.
And the other thing I was going to
show is people get a big kick out of
setting the terminal transparency to,
well, something semi-transparent.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so let us all recite the catechism.
We say emacs foo.c.
We cat it out just so
you can see what you did.
We say cc.
We do add a dash g because we're
going to run the debugger in a moment.
We say a.out because by default the
name of the executable is a.out.
We put dot slash because we want to
run the one in our current directory
and not some other a.out that might
be somewhere out in the system that
our search path is going to find us.
[Transcript missing]
and that's pretty much all you need.
That's the command line tools.
So now we're done and you can all
go out in the halls now and tell
everybody about the amazingly
short command line tool session.
Okay, but nobody's getting up,
so I'll go into a little bit more
detail on some of the things.
So the shells, the shell is basically
a command interpreter.
It's just a traditional UNIX-y term.
One of the curiosities of UNIX,
shall we say, is that there are a number
of different shells that have
been developed over the years.
Since a shell is just
a normal UNIX program,
it's actually possible to have
many different shells running at
the same time on a UNIX system.
And so people take advantage
of that and they invent shells.
There are shells written in Scheme.
There are shells that use funny syntaxes.
But there's two main families
of shells that you'll find,
and both of these are
installed by default.
The original family is called the
Born Shell after the Bell Labs guy
that originally put it together,
and it has a specific syntax
that you'll hear referred
to as the Born Shell syntax.
Since it was installed as bin-sh,
you'll also see it
referred to as just bin-sh.
Now, it turns out we have a couple
implementations of that.
One's called ZSH.
That's the default for 10.1 and earlier.
For 10.2 and later, for Jaguar,
excuse me, Jaguar and later,
we have Bash.
Bash is the GNU project's
reimplementation of the Born Shell.
It's short for the Born Again Shell.
Ha, ha, ha.
Anyway, it has,
among other nice properties,
it's quite a bit faster than the ZSH.
The syntax, though,
that is not necessarily
to everybody's taste,
and there's another family of
shells that people have used,
which is called the C shell.
Originally comes from Berkeley Unix.
And the incarnation that we
use on OS X is called TCSH.
And it's the one I personally prefer.
In general, the commands that's over look
the same between the two.
So in some ways, a matter of taste is,
how do you like to do loops,
and how do you like to
quote things and so forth.
So you have to be kind of an
aficionado maybe to decide
which one you really prefer.
Usually most people it's good enough
just to pick whatever you get by default.
[Transcript missing]
Since I'm up here and I had
to put together the slides,
I got to decide which one was
going to be the one true editor.
So we'll talk about Emacs first.
Emacs is an editor that's been
around for a very long time,
since actually long before UNIX, well,
not long before UNIX is,
but somewhat before UNIX existed.
And it was actually originally
developed on ITS machines at MIT.
That's how old it is.
It's highly customizable.
It actually has a Lisp-like
language inside that you
use to program its behavior.
And people have used that over the years
to build in quite a lot of good features.
For instance,
Emacs' knowledge of C syntax
is actually pretty good.
So if you hit a tab to go to a new line,
and the new line doesn't jump
over to where you think it should,
you've probably made a mistake
in your code somewhere up front.
And it's best to,
instead of arguing with Emacs,
to go back and find out where
you typed the extra brace,
or forgot to close a comment,
or what have you.
So on 10.1,
we have the standard version is 20.7,
and I believe it's something like a
20.8 or something like that for Jaguar.
This is a single window editor,
so it just sits inside a terminal window.
It doesn't open up multiple
windows of its own.
There's an X11 version
that's downloadable also,
but you have to, of course,
be running an X server for that.
So because we value diversity,
we also provide VI.
You know, that's interesting.
There wasn't any applause for Emacs.
This is bad.
I've got a tough audience here.
I have a good story to tell about VI.
I actually used VI full-time
for about a year,
about 20 years ago.
Then I switched over to Emacs and
have been using it ever since.
Coming back to Apple,
every so often I get stuck
using VI for whatever reason.
After 20 years,
I still remember all the VI commands.
So that's a good thing about VI.
The commands are easy to learn.
Things are fairly straightforward.
It doesn't have all the flexibility.
Now a couple of people at Apple said,
"Well, what about Vim?" Okay,
there is an improved
version of VI called Vim.
It has a lot of this customizability,
but you have to get it by downloading.
It's not in Jaguar.
Other than completing,
I'll mention we have things like Pico
that's also installed in the system.
Again,
there's literally dozens of editors
available for the download if
there's something else you prefer.
And Sean has a demo of Emacs.
This is just a quick and simple setup.
It is a UNIX system.
Write a file.
Use real paths.
Everyone knows this program,
and unlike Stan's,
I have a proper return value.
That's because those of us who
use VI know to follow standards.
There's the compiler.
It's awfully quick on this machine.
Head on out.
And for people who like this.
And we can say... Come on,
where's the applause?
[Transcript missing]
and David There's also an
Aqua version of Emacs which was
done from the Next Step version.
Unfortunately,
I didn't bring it so I can't show that.
Thank you, Sean.
So if you send your
email address to Sean,
he will personally send you a
copy of this cool Emacs that
I was hoping you would demo.
This would actually be one that
would be a better Emacs to use.
If we can get that
folded into the system,
I'm hoping we'll be able to
do that in a future version.
The multiple windows,
Emacs with running inside a
terminal window is convenient.
You can run it over the net.
You can do all that kind of good stuff.
But having a multiple window Emacs
with the buffers and mouse sensitivity
is actually a really good thing.
Okay, so we'll cover a little
bit about languages.
We have, of course, C, we have C++,
we have Objective-C,
and we have Objective-C++.
We have Java.
This is based on Sun's Java 1.3.1.
There's a full set of
the command-line tools,
jikes and so forth, that you can run.
We have a number of
interpreted type languages.
We have Perl, Tickle, PHP,
and in Jaguar there will also be Python.
For 10.1 you'd have to download it.
The third parties also have
command-line versions of their tools.
There is a command-line version
of MetroWorks and there's command
lines for for ABSOX Fortran.
In addition, you can download G77s,
the Fortran compiler.
How many people want it to
be a standard part of Jaguar?
It hasn't been decided yet,
but it's a commonly requested item,
and so it's quite possible
to still be able to do that.
So there's also some nutcases that
have been working on Ada for OS X.
Where are the nutcases?
I know they're in this
audience somewhere.
and It actually is
working just as a very,
very short time ago.
They're actually starting
to work on how to get it
integrated into Project Builder.
But the command line
stuff is there already.
Probably not going to be a
standard thing in Jaguar.
We can also download versions
of LISP and Scheme and so forth.
There's quite a few languages
that have been ported to OS X.
So our build tool options,
as Sean alluded,
there are basically two kinds of makes.
GNU make is a standard.
There's also a BSD make,
but it's pretty much for compatibility.
And actually,
I personally don't know of any tools
that require the use of BSD make,
but I know that such exist.
There's also a command-line
tool called JAM,
which is the underlying
make-type tool for PBX build,
which is a command-line
version of Project Builder.
So it sounds kind of odd, you know,
why would you have a command-line
tool for Project Builder?
Well, it has an advantage in a work
group where you say you have
some people using IDE and some
people using the command line,
or if you have a situation
where you need to run,
say, a nightly script,
and you don't want to have to make
your most junior guy come in and
click on the mouse in the middle of
the night to get something to run.
So, you can also SSH into a machine
and run PBX build there.
So, PBX build is very convenient.
The Project Builder projects
are actually in a text form.
They're XML syntax and
they're textual files.
And the truly brave can
actually edit them manually,
but officially we don't recommend it.
But if you're truly brave, truly brave.
Okay, I should also note that
Apple's Jam is extended from
the net version to support PB.
So, if you download a net version of Jam,
don't expect to be able to drop it
in on top of the Jam that we supply.
Other useful tools,
we have about 400 or 500,
I think in Jaguar it's actually
closer to over 500 now,
tools in slash bin and slash user bin.
And the collection of tools
most resembles FreeBSD.
There's CVS, RCS,
and SCCS for source code control.
CVS is perhaps the most
commonly used of those.
There are a lot of projects
that run on the net,
open source projects will use CVS over
the network to manage their code.
For people at old UNIX types
that use the old TROF,
NROF formatting tools,
those are actually all still there.
At this point, their main use is to
format the man pages.
I'm not sure that anybody actually writes
new stuff in them outside of man pages.
But they're all there if
you love that kind of stuff.
We have Lex and Yak for
compiler generation.
We have the GNU equivalents
Flex and Bison.
We also have a lot of tools that are
more expected to manipulate object files,
do fairly low-level things.
There's RanLib and AR,
which I'll talk more about in a bit.
The assembler is called AS.
It generally resembles the GNU syntax,
but it's evolved somewhat,
so it's a good idea to check the
OS X assembler manual if you're
getting into assembly code.
For the old Mac heads,
the syntax is somewhat
different from PPC-ASM,
so you should be aware of that.
O-Tool is the tool we use instead
of ObjDump to dump out object
files to get the contents of them.
And you can do man-o-tool
to find out more about it.
We also have things like AutoConf,
which I'll also talk more about.
Okay, shifting gears a little
bit to talk about APIs.
We implement most of POSIX, okay,
but we don't implement all of POSIX,
and we want you to report
POSIX nonconformance
wherever you find it.
Now,
POSIX applies to both command-line tools
as well as to programming interfaces.
So, for instance,
if LS-L doesn't operate as
you would expect it to do
on a different UNIX machine,
you know, that is a bug in the
command-tool side of the program.
of the POSIX specification.
and then the anything that doesn't
operate like what a quote normal
UNIX machine operates like would be
a non-conformance in the POSIX API.
and So we'll get to POSIX eventually,
I think,
but it's certainly not the case in 10.1,
it's not the case in 10.2.
Other APIs, we do OpenGL and GLUT.
From personal experience,
I think things come over quite readily,
very little change required.
We also have Carbon and Cocoa for GUI,
which, of course,
you've heard nonstop about here.
There's also a different API,
which is I/O Kit, that's used for drivers
and kernel extensions.
And I/O Kit is a C++
object-oriented thing.
It's actually kind of interesting to
use C++ at the device driver level.
It makes it possible to write
very small drivers and be able
to share most of the code.
And for anybody that's ever tried
their hand at a Linux device driver,
you'll really appreciate that.
We provide a lot of the common code,
and you only have to write the
stuff that's unique to your device.
We also provide,
not as a standard part of OS X,
but we have a couple different
X11 systems available.
So if users can run a server,
then X11 apps can run
on those machines also.
So APIs are provided by what
are known as frameworks.
And I have to apologize for
doing a graphics on this.
This is the only graphics in the talk.
Command line guys don't
need no stinking graphics.
But this one looked good and I said,
oh sure, why not.
Okay, so a framework is basically Apple's
answer to the problem of managing shared
libraries and headers and resources
that go along with those libraries.
So what it actually looks like on
the system is you'll have something
for a framework called Foo.
You'll have a Foo.framework.
Inside that,
you'll have the shared library proper,
which will usually just be called Foo.
And if you did the file command,
the file command tells
you what's in a file.
And the file command says
this is an executable.
Well, in some sense, it's an executable,
but you don't execute it by itself.
It's just a shared library.
That's just how it happens to be marked.
There's also a subdirectory
called headers.
All the headers sit in that,
and there's a subdirectory
called resources.
And the resources are things like
strings that you might localize or
other information about the framework.
And these are all text files, again,
in XML syntax.
And you can edit them
if you're feeling brave.
So, another detail about frameworks,
if you actually go wandering
around looking at the framework,
you notice that a bunch
of stuff is symlinked.
And when I say headers there,
headers technically is a symlink to
versions and then say A and then headers.
And this is a versioning mechanism
that frameworks have that in practice
is not really used very much.
The most you'll notice is when you try
and look at the headers and it says,
oh, well, this is just a symlink.
And then you have to say,
look at headers slash,
and that'll show you what's inside.
So that's just something
to know about frameworks.
To use them, you'll say include foo/foo.h
in your source code.
I'm sure some of you are
looking at it and thinking,
"Isn't that confusing if
you had something like user
include foo/foo.h?" Actually,
yes.
There is an ambiguity there.
They chose this framework
syntax before I came along,
so I would have told them to use
something like foo;foo.h or something
that wasn't so obviously a path.
But anyway, we luck out most of the time
because user include doesn't
have a foo subdirectory in it,
so this thing doesn't get confused.
Is that some of that capital letters?
Yeah.
uppercase, lowercase, that's a non-issue.
It's basically a convention thing.
[Transcript missing]
Most of the frameworks live in
/systems/library/frameworks.
There's about 40 or 50 of them, I guess.
However, most of the system stuff,
the standard UNIX system stuff,
doesn't live in the frameworks.
That's the normal headers, POSIX headers,
live in slash user include.
They look the same as always.
If anybody remembers the
public beta and earlier stages,
there was actually a, quote,
system framework.
And all the headers actually lived
in system library frameworks,
and user include was sort of symlinks.
In practice,
that turned out to be kind of confusing,
and so we essentially ditched
the whole system framework idea.
And the only remnant now is that
if you look at the user lib,
you'll see a reference to,
or you'll see a copy of the
file user lib lib system dot a,
or sorry, lib system dot b dot dilib
or something like that.
And that is the standard C library
and all the stuff that goes in it.
And it still has the syntax
as if it were a framework.
Anyway, to define your own frameworks,
you need to, well,
you can stick them in system library
frameworks so they can be erased
by the next OS X software update,
or, I'm sorry,
[Transcript missing]
So moving on again.
So the compiler is GCC.
And we get this question a lot.
I think pretty much everybody's
worked it out by now.
But the compiler is GCC.
You do not need to download from
the FSF and try to build GCC in
order to get started because you'll
almost certainly be disappointed.
We have a lot of extensions to GCC.
Some of those extensions,
like the framework lookup,
are fairly important for
doing anything on OS X.
So whether those things
will make it into FSF GCC,
we don't know.
It's kind of a thing unique to the Mac.
And the rest of the world isn't
necessarily that enthusiastic
about adopting this stuff.
But by and large,
the usual GCC options work.
We do have a number
of additional options.
Most of them are distinct
to Mac programming,
so you won't need them for the
porting of UNIX applications.
And for Mac applications,
most of that stuff will
have worked already.
That is, if you used it previously
on OS 9 application,
Pragmas and so forth, they'll work pretty
much the same on OS X.
I just wanted to call your attention
to a couple interesting options.
We have a -f altavec that
enables all the altavec support.
By default,
because altavec actually makes
the symbol vector into a keyword.
If you had a program with
the variable called vector,
you turn on f altavec
and it kind of chokes.
We made that an option.
You have to actually
explicitly request -f altavec.
to VEC.
So, if you're porting anything,
and there's probably not
too much of this code,
if you're porting from a
PowerPC Linux where they had
a Motorola version of the
AltaVec support added to GCC,
they called that option dash FVec.
And we renamed it to AltaVec because
that was a little bit more accurate.
And so that would be what
you'd change the FVec into.
Another option in the compiler session
we'll talk about is some more depth.
There's a -mdynamicnopic
that you might want to add to
when building applications.
It saves a couple of instructions,
but it makes your
application not relocatable.
This is fine for applications.
You wouldn't want to do this all the
time because the shared libraries
you actually want to be able to
relocate around an application's
address space as the dynamic library
gets loaded and unloaded by the OS.
So to build libraries,
it depends on whether you want to
do a statically linked library,
a traditional archive format,
or a dynamic library.
To build a static library, you use AR,
another old UNIX program,
and then you use RanLib on the
result to make that into a,
essentially to add a table of contents.
This is something that you don't
normally do on a Linux machine,
so that's a little bit of a departure
for people that are familiar with Linux.
The other way to build a library is to
make it a dynamically linked library.
That's the library that
underlies the framework.
And there we use the
option cc-dynamiclib.
and then all the right things
happen behind the scenes.
Now, one way to cover this up,
and quite a few heavily ported
applications know how to do this,
there is a system of shell
scripts called LibTool,
which tries to give a
platform-independent mechanism
for building libraries.
One of the unfortunate things about
the many Unix variants in the world
is that while they all call their
compiler CC and they all use dash
G to say output debugging info,
somehow that never quite happened
for building of shared libraries.
On one system it's dash R,
another one's dash shared,
for us it's dash dynamic lib, etc.
The LibTool is basically a wrapper,
and it's a shell script,
that wraps around the compiler
and the linker invocations to pass
the correct kinds of options for
the platform you're running on.
So it's a very handy thing.
For porting,
the main thing that you have to worry
about is updating the lib tool bits.
There's a standard that
comes from the GNU project,
GNU.org, and most projects have fairly
up-to-date lib tool bits and
they know about Darwin OS X,
but I've seen a couple where
they've been out of date and the
right thing to do is to update.
and speaking of Darwin,
another thing to know about is the
different versions of the system.
You've heard this a bunch of times,
lower layer system is called Darwin.
Darwin basically consists
of the open source part,
few or no frameworks,
I think core foundation is probably
the only framework that's actually
in Darwin and none of the GUI stuff.
This matters because there's two
different kinds of tools that
you use to get version numbers.
One of the tools is called SW_VERSE.
That reports the Mac OS X version,
such as 10.1.3.
It also, underneath,
reports a build number,
something like a 5P64.
That's the way to identify
an exact build image.
Most of the time that really
only matters to people,
say, getting seeds where it's different
than the final release number.
The other tool,
and this is a UNIX standard tool,
is called UNAME.
You can say UNAME-A and it will
give you the Darwin version number.
There's a little chart
showing how they match up.
Mac OS X-O is Darwin 1.3.1, 10.1 is 1.4.
Then,
for reasons that seemed good at the time,
but they still seem good,
we bumped the numbers so that the
software update to 10.1.1 changed
the Darwin version number to 10.1.1.
There were a few people
surprised by that,
let me tell you.
Not often you get a major version number
change by doing a software update.
Anyway,
the purpose of that actually was to
align the Darwin version numbers with
the build numbers used internally.
So when I say 10.1 is base 5P whatever,
the Darwin is a version 5
to go along with that 5.
So to take an example, in Jaguar,
your systems, you name dash A,
will say it's a Darwin 6.0.
And do along with 10.2 as
an OS X version number.
The reason this matters is because
it ties into one of the very common
ways of doing handling ports,
which is to use GNU's
configure and make process.
and There's a lot of
stuff to go into here.
We don't really have time
to go into it in any depth.
Makefiles are basically not
adequate for really large or
complicated software projects.
So what the GNU project adopted years
ago was a process of editing the
Makefile to adapt it to the system.
And the shell script,
which started out as a
couple-page shell script,
and is now like 100 pages long
if you ever printed it out.
But the configure script will
essentially edit the Makefile and take
care of any system dependencies or
user-chosen options or what have you,
and edit the Makefile so that the
right thing will happen for the system.
and this is why in many of these
projects you can actually pull the
source code down off the FTP site,
take it on to your OS X system,
even if the code has never been ported
before and many of them just work.
Configure knows how to dig
around and user include.
It knows how to turn if-def's on and off
depending on what a system has on it.
Edits the make file appropriately.
When you run make,
all those things are taken into account
and the program produces the executable.
So one of the ways, though,
in which that could fail is if the
guessing part about what system
you're running on is incorrect.
[Transcript missing]
and then later on the configure script
can then make a test based on that.
Is this a version that supports a feature
in C-type.h or something like that.
Anyway, config.guess for many projects
nowadays is up-to-date enough to
recognize Darwin as a platform,
but not always.
And if yours is one of the unlucky guys,
then you want to get the two scripts,
config.guess and config.sub,
from the GNU organization.
And I put there the URL that actually
gives you to the CVS web where
it shows you the latest version.
Since these two scripts
are self-contained,
it's generally always okay just
to take those scripts and drop
them into an existing project.
Another thing to help you
get started on porting,
some projects do want to see GCC.
They actually invoke GCC by name.
It's convenient to symlink CC to GCC,
C++ to G++.
This will be done in Jaguar.
If you look at Jaguar,
it's already got those symlinks,
so this is strictly a 10.1 issue now.
Now the other thing that people
often ask about is they want
some kind of predefined macro.
And we don't have a predefined macro.
Partly the reason is historical,
partly it's a policy thing.
The macro that we would use would
inevitably get confused with,
say, different generation of Next Step,
which doesn't really matter much anymore,
but it did up until fairly recently,
and other versions of
Apple's systems as well.
So in general,
what we recommend is either to
test for the features directly,
and I'll talk about
that more in a minute,
or to essentially insist
that the user add a dash,
a define of Mac OS X as a symbol and
then use that in your code if you
absolutely have to do it that way.
So there are interfaces
that have to be ported,
despite all the command-line emphasis.
Curses just works.
Curses are built into
the system framework.
It's already all there.
I haven't personally experienced
any problems with bringing over
a piece of code that uses curses.
There are now aquified
versions of TickleTK and of QT.
So you can actually write a tickle
script that brings up the lickable
buttons and and all that good stuff.
X11 is available if your users
are willing to run an X11 server.
In something like a
university environment,
that would be a very
reasonable thing to do.
Those are available.
The distributions are
commonly readily available.
There's X386.
There's a commercial package from Tenon.
[Transcript missing]
The OpenGL framework is
called OpenGL.framework,
which means you include OpenGL/GL.h.
So one way is to change the source
code if def every include of GL slash
or the other alternative might be
to actually add a GL subdirectory to
user include and make symlinks from
there to the OpenGL.framework headers.
Some more common problems
that people run into.
The compiler uses pre-compiled headers.
These pre-compiled headers win big time.
They're like a 4x speed improvement
for compiling Cocoa things.
As it happens,
relatively little Unix code that
you're bringing over uses Cocoa,
amazingly enough.
And so you're actually not
really getting any benefit from
using pre-compiled headers.
And the preprocessor,
this mechanism works by using
an intelligent preprocessor,
sort of intelligent anyway.
And it takes extra time to preprocess
when doing its thinking about whether
to use the pre-compiled header or not.
So as it turns out,
it basically has no upsides and all kinds
of downsides when doing Unix porting.
And so we have an option no
CPP pre-comp that basically
switches back to using GNU CPP.
Other things you'll run into,
there's missing declarations.
There's some that we know about that
are going to be fixed in Jaguar,
and there's probably others
we haven't heard about,
and they're going to be fixed
in whatever comes after Jaguar.
Ditto for missing functions.
One way to deal with that
is to re-implement them,
conditionalize them when
they're running on OS X.
Sometimes you have to
if-def the functionality,
alas.
Another thing that can
happen is extra definitions.
The system framework, lib system,
has a lot of stuff glued into it.
As I mentioned,
the curses library is glued into it.
If you have a program that
can't be linked with curses,
that you don't normally
expect to link with curses,
and so you reuse goto xy or
some other curses function,
then you'll get something
back from the linker saying,
warning, multiple definitions of goto xy.
You're saying,
The only one I know of is mine.
It is a warning.
It's not a fatal flaw.
The linker complains because
Mac developers expect it to complain.
We have an option called multiply
define suppress that you can feed to the
compiler and it gets passed on to linker
and that will stop the complaints.
Another one that I've seen
in that same category,
we have an implementation in GetOpt,
which is used to get command-line
options in a standardized fashion.
The lib system has a version of GetOpt,
and they had a lot of GNU tools
link in their own copy of GetOpt,
so you had also warnings
about duplicates there.
Getting a little bit weird.
So how many people knew about
designated initializers already?
Yeah, that's about what I thought.
They've been in GNU/C for about 10 years,
and they're basically a way to
fill in an array positionally,
which is kind of cool.
No need to have Cs of zeros trying
to get down to the one element you
want to fill in with the character
code of A or something like that.
and David L.
It turns out that C99 actually has
picked up this GNU extension and it's
now actually a standard part of language,
except they added an equal sign.
Anyway, as it happens,
and for technical reasons that
I'll be happy to rant about offline
should anybody be interested,
our 295-based compiler
can't deal with this,
and it will give you lots of errors.
One way in which we noticed this
was in GCC version 3 itself,
which uses designated initializers now,
and it complained.
So this will be fixed in 3.1,
so it will no longer be an issue.
DLopen is also something
that's occasionally requested.
This is to open a dynamic
library programmatically.
I can't remember if it's a POSIX feature,
but it's fairly common among
UNIX systems in one form or another.
It's not directly available, and in fact,
for technical reasons,
it can't be totally emulated
by the Mach dynamic load stuff.
So, in general,
what people have been doing is
they emulate the functionality,
whichever part of the
functionality they happen to need.
Another thing that people
have bumped into is P-threads.
We have P-threads,
but we don't have complete P-threads.
Or perhaps a better way to say it
is we don't have all the P-thread
options that all the P-thread
implementations in the world have,
and so people have run
into missing options.
Again, sometimes you can emulate,
sometimes you'll just have to send
a bug report to Apple and say,
"Resend it every week
until something happens."
Feel free.
We use eight-digit numbers for radar,
so there's plenty left.
We're only up to about 29 million,
I guess.
Anyway, namespace conflicts.
It's always been possible that there
are a lot of namespace conflicts
because of the way Maco works.
In practice,
I haven't actually seen as many
namespace conflicts as one might expect.
In any case, if you run into this,
the way you'll see this is
that you'll have a function,
it'll report a conflict.
There's no documentation on the
function it's conflicting with.
It's just in some framework.
One way to deal with this then is
to use the option-2 level namespace,
which introduces and makes
non-exported functions invisible.
Like I said, it happens to some people,
it doesn't happen that often.
But you'll know it if it does because
you have a conflict between symbol
names and there's no way to fix it.
[Transcript missing]
So, Sean is going to give us a demo.
Now,
I think the way he described it more,
he was going to do all of
Mozilla and in 15 keystrokes.
You rea- I don't think.
Alright, what I was just going to
show here was something using
configure that ran into problems.
I don't know if anyone's
familiar with it,
if anyone used rdist.
Artist is like rsync,
which is built in the system,
only where rsync pulls, artist pushes.
A while ago, I had a request for artist,
and I supplied it for someone.
It almost but not quite worked.
Artist 7 almost not quite worked.
Artist 6 just worked.
I've already configured this
because it takes a while.
We do a make, and it runs for a while.
[Transcript missing]
These are what my disks look like.
Can people read that or
should I increase the size?
All right.
Setfop, that's 14.
How about 18?
Oh, there we go.
All right.
As you see, the first set of patches are
to the configure.in file,
which is what autoconf uses to
generate the configure script,
which you should then run.
Most systems,
for those who are aware of them,
configure comes already.
You just run configure.
However, if you are the developer,
you need to create the script
that generates configure.
There were some problems with
statfs in the original version,
and this does the right thing.
The other one worked,
it just wasn't as good, I thought.
And there's more of this configure stuff.
And there was an include of malloc.h.
malloc.h is not a standard include file.
You should not use it.
And lastly,
artist used a function called setmode,
despite the fact that
ANSI described it as setmode.
So, there was that.
and John Lennon.
Thank you.
. . . . . . . . .
Anyway, autoconf to generate it.
Run it again, and as everyone would see,
it just...
This did not happen in my previous tests,
I'm sorry.
But it worked.
I do apologize.
Anyway.
That's generally,
I actually had to search for
a while to find a well-known
program that would not compile.
Most things you just run configure
and make and they do just work.
Didn't I do that?
Yes, in fact I did.
Oh, no you didn't.
Thank you.
I am stupid today.
Yeah, teamwork is good.
Yeah.
Wow, you're smarter than me.
Voila, it works.
Yeah,
so that's an example of how you deal
with things that can be--and I did,
by the way,
send the patches to this back to the
artist 7 maintainer and I have not
checked recently if he folded them in
but they were small so I presume he did.
Back to Stan.
Thank you, Sean.
So that's a, you know,
very nearly a perfect example
of what actually happens,
including remembering to rerun Configure
when you make these kinds of changes.
Now, if the thing that Sean did
looked like gobbledygook,
you know, there's actually a,
it is documented how to do this stuff,
and that's what I was
going to talk about.
The tool is called Autoconf,
and Autoconf is, how should I say, weird.
There's a macro process called M4.
The syntax is bizarre.
The only excuse I can think of is that
it was developed incrementally over
a number of years and so it's more
as accreted as much as anything else.
But what AutoConf does
though is very powerful,
which is it essentially directly
tests your system to find
out what things are present.
So for instance, you need to know whether
ctype.h is present.
ANSI requires an ISO requires
that ctype.h be present.
It's not necessarily the case that
every machine in the world has one.
So what AutoConf does is it basically
synthesizes a one-line C program that
just says include angle bracket ctype.h,
compiles it,
and sees what the compiler said.
Compiler errors out, guess what?
Either ctype.h is not there or
it has a mistake in it and you
don't want to use it anyway.
So it then turns on a flag,
depending on how you can set up things,
says something like
ctype.h not available.
And then in your code you would say
something like if ctype.h available,
include ctype.h else do something else,
whatever it is you need
to do in your program.
So the auto-conf mechanism is
essentially 100% accurate for
the system you're building on.
Now, it's not quite so accurate if you
need to build on a range of systems.
If you're, say,
on a Jaguar system and you need
to build something that works on
10.1 and Jaguar and future systems,
you may have to think a little bit
harder about how to make that work.
One of the things we have available
as of Jaguar is a new header
file called availabilitymacros.h.
And this will have a set of macros that
essentially define what's available
in different versions of the OS.
It has macros that are like half a
page long and they read something like,
if Mac OS X 1.0 but not 10.2,
things like that.
That's how they literally read.
So you can use those to make something
that works across multiple versions
should it be using features that
change from one version to the next.
But anyway, the fortunate thing,
the nice thing about AutoConf is that
it actually has a book describing it.
And it was just published
a couple years ago.
And it's just a standard book,
readily available.
In fact, I noticed last fall in
Las Vegas in Borders Bookstore,
which is not exactly what you
think of as the high-tech mecca,
okay?
Not Las Vegas and not
really Borders either.
And they had in the entryway
where everybody coming into,
going out of the store has,
and they had large numbers of this
book on display for everybody to
see as they're going in and out.
And I'm going, you know,
there must be a lot of
AutoConf experts in Las Vegas now.
[Transcript missing]
This also describes AutoMake,
which is a way to synthesize
Make files that a number of
people are using nowadays.
And it also describes LibTool,
which I talked about earlier.
It actually has a lot of stuff
about the inner secrets of LibTool.
Some caveats to go along with it.
So, you can be root.
Is there anybody that does not
know how to become root on OS X?
Good.
Okay.
Anyway, but now that you've created root,
you have all these responsibilities
to go along with it.
In particular,
it's very tempting to dink around
with the system to try and get
it to compile your program.
We do not recommend this in general
because you'll take that program over
and somebody else will try and build it,
and they will not have the
modifications on their system.
So that's why we're doing sim linking
GCC to CC in the system so that
every system will behave this way.
I mentioned before about sim linking,
adding user include GL slash
GL dot H to user include.
Again, if somebody doesn't change
their system in that way,
that will fail for them.
So if you do this,
you need to come up with some way to,
say,
have a script they can run as root and
modify their system in the same way.
Another thing to be aware of,
Maco object files are very different.
They are a little bit like ELF,
they're a little bit like... I'm sorry,
I don't have anything as
exciting as whatever they're...
[Transcript missing]
is... Pardon?
Oh, Python.
That's right.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
Incorrectly slandering Perl.
It's Python that I want to slander.
Okay.
and actually there was another
similar case that actually happens
in the GCC sources themselves,
but they have a library called libffi,
which is supposed to call
from Java to native C code,
and somebody in there just had to have a
mips.s lowercase and a mips.s uppercase.
So you check this out from
the FSF onto your HFS volume,
and CVS doesn't like it at all.
It says you've got a conflicting file.
Every time you check it out or update,
you've got a conflicting file.
Yes, I know it's a conflicting file.
And it works fine on UFS.
So if you're not aware,
your buddy that just happened to be
building something on a UFS partition,
everything works fine,
and on yours it messes up
for some strange reason.
So to talk a little bit about debugging,
Mac OS X debugger is GDB.
It's currently based
on the FSF 5.0 release.
And for Jaguar,
I believe it's based on 5.1.
Is that right?
Yeah.
And it has a lot of additional commands.
Don't have space to go into them all.
There's a session on Friday that
we'll talk about that.
We have a future breakpoint
that you can set for code that
hasn't been loaded in yet.
We can print an obc object.
And actually,
it's almost like a refurbishment.
reflection kind of thing.
You can ask for information on
all kinds of properties of Mach,
such as the Mach tasks.
I found info Mach tasks to be kind
of interesting because it actually
lists all the tasks including the
ones that don't belong to you.
But I didn't actually go in and
try to see what I could do to the
tasks that don't belong to me.
That seemed like an opportunity.
We've heard quite a
bit about GCC3 already.
I'll just cover a couple bits that
are specific to the command line.
The old one is based on 295.
The new one will be based on 3.1,
unless the FSFP will drag their
feet any longer on the 3.1 release.
We have the optimization C++ conformance.
We have what's called
PFE for precompiled headers.
It's a different strategy.
I forgot to mention the
command-line option.
The command-line options are "-dump
pch to write out the headers and then
"-load pch to load them in again.
The release notes for Jaguar
will go into that in more depth.
There is something that's important
to know about this though,
which is in this transitional period,
there are a number of places
where you can get hosed by GCC3.
For instance, its optimization
characteristics are different.
O3, for instance, will inline code,
could cause your program to bloat.
There are C++ conformance issues where
GCC2 let things go and GCC3 says,
"Uh-uh, not going to allow that."
So your code simply fails to compile.
Indeed, in our very own OS X sources,
we ran into a few of those and
people had to go fix their code.
Anyway, so as a workaround,
we set things up so that both
compilers will be available in Jaguar.
And this will be true of the ship Jaguar
as well as the previews that you have.
So the rule is 2952 is always going
to be available at userbin/gcc2.
That's the permanent
home of the executable.
Latest of the version 3,
this will go for 3.2, 3.3 or whatever,
userbin/gcc3.
Then we take userbin/cc and gc and
we symlink to one or the other.
And then to switch back and forth,
we have a script called gccselect.
And you just say gcselect2, gcselect3.
And this will flip all the symlinks.
So you can have a makefile that,
if it refers to gc2 literally,
then you can just,
you can always refer to that.
You don't have to worry
about the switching.
Anything where you just want to
refer to cc and try it both ways,
select script is available.
And again,
that's something where it's going
to be part of Jaguar for some time.
For Project Builder,
we do have a way to pull in legacy
targets into Project Builder.
It sets up a lot of defaults and flags.
It gives you easier
access to documentation.
As I mentioned earlier,
there is a PBX build command.
Sean will do the demo.
I have to apologize for
showing the GUI in this.
This was actually the largest part of
the demo and I was going to demonstrate,
if I
I lost my terminal, didn't I?
Sorry.
And I forgot to change that too.
But it's real easy to do so if we
remember the command and can read it.
Alt, right.
True aficionados put
Terminal in their startup.
I can never remember the path to the
project builder script-- or program,
I should say, so...
Project Builder.
As Stan just said,
one of the things you can
do is use Project Builder to
build a legacy application,
which is your normal
UNIX-type application.
So we'll do that.
Set all the defaults here.
Great.
We don't need the release notes.
Create a new project.
We're going to create an empty project
because it's not one of the others.
and David The thing I'm going
to be wrapping this round is
the GNU Hello World program.
And you may think that
a Hello World program
wouldn't be very complex,
but this is GNU.
So what did I call it?
Now, first thing we need to
do is get the files.
And I have this under new project,
add files.
Thank you.
There are the files that I've gotten.
Just select them all.
Add.
We want to copy rather
than just refer to them,
so that we'll copy the files in there.
We're all done.
Actually, we're not.
The first thing you need to do
with the GNU Hello World program
is you need to configure it.
So we will add a new target.
[Transcript missing]
and Ben Sch will be the program managers.
and the action is ./configure and we
need to tell it which directory to use.
And it's already there.
We're all done.
Don't sit there.
And now let's build it.
And as you can see, it ran configure.
That was almost as easy as
doing it from the command line.
Now that we've done the configure,
however,
we actually want to build the program.
So we do a new target, again,
a legacy makefile.
Let's call this one
hello because that's what
All the actions are right.
We want to set the directory because
otherwise it will use the build directory
and the program wouldn't be there.
Now, we build.
Oops,
first we have to select the right target.
and Let's try building it again.
And there.
And now we can run it.
Accept.
We have not set the executable,
so there's nothing to run.
Setting the executable is easy.
[Transcript missing]
Build and Run.
And look, it printed "Hello World!"
Now that might seem like a whole
lot of work for just Hello World,
and you'd probably be right.
However,
if you have a more complicated program,
you could then use this to set the,
use the nice graphical
interface to the debugger,
which I admit is pretty nice,
and almost as nice as Emacs
interface to the debugger,
which is my personal favorite.
There's always VI's
interface to the debugger.
Bang bang GDB.
And voila, and that's my demo.
I think that's it.
The interesting part about
GNU Hello is it's actually a template.
It's not to the point
that it does anything,
but it provides a template for what a
GNU program is supposed to look like.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Stan and Sean.
Unfortunately,
we have extremely little time.
We started late due to a
small electrical problem,
so we will not have time today for Q&A.
Just for your information,
technical documentation command
line tools all have man pages,
and you obtain that man page at
the terminal prompt man tool name,
as on any Unix system.
There are reference documentation
also in the developer
documentation dev tools directory,
and there's specific detailed
information for the compiler,
preprocessor, GDB, the macro runtime,
and these are all available
in PDF and HTML forms.
More information is available
through various URL tools.
These are all wrapped together
onto the master URL list,
which we list
for everyone.
A roadmap.
Next sessions to look at.
For porting UNIX apps to Mac OS X,
there's a session immediately
following this in Civic Auditorium.
We have a feedback forum for technical
documentation tomorrow as well as the
first of our project builder forums
and our performance tools tomorrow.
I'd be delighted to see you all there.
And with that,
we're going to have to end the session
because we are already over time.
Thank you very much for attending.